[Amit Varma]: I had a bad dream the other night. I dreamed that I was an intern at the income tax department
[Amit Varma]: of the government of India and my boss told me to go and make a list of every tax that
[Amit Varma]: was applied by either the states or the center anywhere in India. So I went to the auditing
[Amit Varma]: department and the guy across the table looked at me and sniggered. What's so funny? I asked.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing, he said and he opened the drawer. Then he took out a big roll of toilet paper
[Amit Varma]: and handed it to me. What's this? I said. It's a list of taxes, he said. And indeed,
[Amit Varma]: in very small font size, there was a list of Indian taxes on it. I started reading and
[Amit Varma]: as I did so, the roll of toilet paper started unspooling. The list went on and on and on.
[Amit Varma]: And soon, the whole room was covered with toilet paper.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Badman.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, my weekly podcast on the seen and unseen effects of
[Amit Varma]: public policy. In the Lord of the Rings, the real hero of the story is not Frodo Baggins,
[Amit Varma]: but the ring he is after, the one ring to rule them all. Well, today's episode is about
[Amit Varma]: the one tax to rule them all, the GST. The GST, or the goods and services tax, is one
[Amit Varma]: central tax that is meant to replace a massive list of many other taxes at the state level.
[Amit Varma]: On the face of it, it's a great idea. So many different taxes create compliance issues and
[Amit Varma]: thus avenues for corruption. They drive up prices and hurt the consumers. They create
[Amit Varma]: friction in trade, which hurts the economy. So here's a scene effect of the GST.
[Amit Varma]: The GST consolidates a whole bunch of different taxes. It simplifies life for businesses,
[Amit Varma]: thus potentially lowering costs for consumers. Now, the GST hasn't been passed in India yet.
[Amit Varma]: And what was just described as a scene effect of the GST is essentially the intended effect.
[Amit Varma]: And the unseen effects I will now talk about also haven't happened yet, but are some of
[Amit Varma]: the possible unintended consequences that might just take place given the way things
[Amit Varma]: are unfolding. To discuss this, I've got as a guest on the show today, Devanshu Dutta,
[Amit Varma]: an economic analyst who is also a columnist for the Business Standard. Devanshu, tell
[Guest]: me what's so great about the GST? Look, in theory, it's an extremely nice idea.
[Guest]: It's probably the best thing to have come out of the European Union in the sense that
[Guest]: you take 10 countries, 12 countries, 20 countries, whatever it is now, and they all have borders,
[Guest]: they all have internal checkpoints, they all have different tax and excise systems. So
[Guest]: the brilliant idea here is that you impose one tax and excise system across these 11
[Guest]: countries. You no longer need the internal borders. And if you don't have the internal
[Guest]: borders, your goods can move faster and with much less in the way of paperwork and friction.
[Guest]: So for example, if, say, the Poles are sending something to Belgium, it might be crossing
[Guest]: three countries on the way, but the truck wouldn't be stopped anywhere in those three
[Guest]: countries. And to make it work, you need a very good computerized backend where everything
[Guest]: can be reconciled and handled. But India does have that. We have 23 states and I think umpteen
[Guest]: Union territories as well, and each of them has a different internal state excise and
[Guest]: tax system. In fact, it takes longer to send something from, say, Bangalore to Bombay directly
[Guest]: by road. And that's just one border, essentially the Karnataka-Maharashtra border that you're
[Guest]: crossing and the Bombay-Octroi at city limits. Then, you know, you could actually send goods
[Guest]: quicker to Colombo and let a ship take it out from Sri Lanka and drop it in Bombay harbour,
[Guest]: then directly send it by road. And that sort of problem multiplies when you're talking
[Guest]: five states, say, sending something from, again, let's say from Kerala to UP is an insanely
[Guest]: complex thing because you have trucks held up at every state border. You have local state
[Guest]: excise officers insisting on inspecting every cargo, every manifest. A lot of speed money
[Guest]: has to change hands. And there's a lot of friction in the system. Now, if you could
[Guest]: get rid of this friction, it would be, for the first time, India would actually be one
[Guest]: market. So, in theory, it's an extremely good idea. The thing is, of course, that India
[Guest]: is also a federal state. The states have specific powers to raise taxes. And to a degree, their
[Guest]: financial independence depends on their ability to raise taxes. So, by imposing a centrally
[Guest]: administered tax rate, you are essentially asking the states to give up a certain amount
[Guest]: of their financial independence. And the carrot here is that you can tell them that eventually
[Guest]: you will gain because, as trade improves, every state in the nation should eventually
[Guest]: be gaining. And also, a commitment from the center to divide the revenues from the central
[Guest]: tax equitably. These are, again, in theory, very nice things in practice with half a dozen
[Guest]: regional parties and a lot of political, let's say, a shifting flow of political alliances.
[Guest]: It's taken six or seven years to work through this. And one of the problems with GST is
[Guest]: that, unlike its younger rather value-added tax, you actually need to get more or less
[Guest]: every state on board to start making this thing work. With VAT, you could actually say
[Guest]: that, okay, six states make it work, and then the other states came on board slowly. Here,
[Guest]: unfortunately, if you're transporting goods from Kerala to UP, even if UP and Kerala agree
[Guest]: to be part of the GST, if Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, which come in between on Chhattisgarh,
[Guest]: do not want to be part of GST, they'll go through the same issues of being stopped at
[Guest]: the border. So you need it to essentially be an all-India scheme. They've managed to
[Guest]: get that, finally, to sort of happen. It's still not clear whether that will happen,
[Guest]: but at least the constitutional hurdle of states being willing to give up their powers,
[Guest]: that has gone through. Now, you're only fighting about the rather important details of what
[Guest]: exactly this tax will be. And that is where the next set of problems in negotiations arise.
[Amit Varma]: So to sum it up, essentially, you would say the scene effect or the intended scene effect
[Amit Varma]: of GST would just be to reduce all the friction along borders. And while India has been one
[Amit Varma]: country since 1947, we've been a whole bunch of different markets. And by turning it into
[Amit Varma]: one market, we'll make it cheaper for the consumer and easier for businesses to function.
[Amit Varma]: One of the unseen effects you pointed out is that states lose some of the independence
[Amit Varma]: and competitiveness they get from a federal structure where they can compete with each
[Amit Varma]: other and set their own taxes and so on. Do you feel that this is per se, regardless of
[Amit Varma]: consequences, on principle, a bad thing? Because governance, as we have seen through history,
[Amit Varma]: works best when it is as local as possible. So to actually centralize something like this
[Guest]: and not allow states to set their own rules. I agree that there is always going to be a
[Guest]: large problem with an imperial centralized structure. But if such a system can be made
[Guest]: to work across Europe, which don't forget, had so many internal wars as well happening
[Guest]: over such a long period, and it's worked pretty well, it would be the, you know, the best
[Guest]: reason for the European Union to exist would be the fact that you have essentially a GST
[Guest]: type system. So I suppose if sovereign nations can decide that we will live with this, you
[Guest]: can probably make it happen in the Indian context. But yes, it has to be voluntary.
[Guest]: And it has to be carefully negotiated so that, you know, the states feel comfortable with
[Amit Varma]: this process. In theory, GST sounds great, but implementing
[Amit Varma]: it in practice has taken many years to come to where it's at, has gone through many compromises
[Amit Varma]: in the political process. The political economy is messy and complicated with so many states
[Amit Varma]: and parties and competing interests. What are the sort of unseen effects that this can
[Guest]: lead to? Well, first, even Europe went through two
[Guest]: years of chaos putting it together. We have arguably as good computer systems and we have
[Guest]: that experience to say that there are certain mistakes maybe we won't make because the Europeans
[Guest]: made it and, you know, we look at best practices. However, that apart, what we are going to
[Guest]: end up with for a while is an extremely compromised system where first of all, states do not want
[Guest]: to get rid of their right to tax specifically high value items like alcohol, tobacco and
[Guest]: petroleum products. Those three things they would like exemptions on. And if you have
[Guest]: that, then in a sense, if you look at the Indian revenue, the indirect tax revenue breakups,
[Guest]: those three things are extremely important. Second, instead of having essentially the
[Guest]: European GST works because they have very few tax slabs, they have I think a total of
[Guest]: three slabs which is one for goods, one for services and a third for special items.
[Guest]: In India, we already have four slabs plus a commitment to a fifth slab and in effect
[Guest]: a sixth slab and maybe a seventh. So if you have a GST which is spread across seven different
[Guest]: slabs and I'm not including zero tax items in this, it will be incredibly messy and complex
[Guest]: system to implement because in a sense, any sort of GST works on a VAT principle that
[Guest]: I pay for, you know, I pay for a car but and the chap who manufactures the car is taxed
[Guest]: on the value of what he's adding to the 30,000 or 50,000 parts which he's bought and sourced
[Guest]: from the market and the expenses he's had in terms of labour to put it together, blah,
[Guest]: blah. So if you have that sort of thing happening and every one of those 30,000 items then have
[Guest]: to be, you know, classified under seven different categories and taxes calculated on that, again
[Guest]: in theory, yes, of course, a computer can do this but in practice, it will be an extremely
[Guest]: complicated and very AI, artificial intelligence dependent process where in a sense, even an
[Guest]: assessing officer will not be able to tell you offhand what is going on. That's one problem.
[Guest]: The second thing is that you have exemptions where essentially state governments are still
[Guest]: going to be imposing their own taxes, which means that in a sense, lorries will be stopped
[Guest]: at the border of every state and this whole process of checking your manifesto and a five
[Guest]: kilometre long queue while manifests are being checked and cargos are being inspected visually,
[Guest]: etc. and of course, the associated corruption that goes with this whole process that doesn't
[Guest]: disappear. The state excise and revenue departments remain live departments. It isn't as though
[Guest]: the officers are going to be given a pension and told to go away or absorbed in different
[Guest]: departments. They will stay in uniform and they will continue to hold up trucks. So those
[Guest]: frictions will remain for a while, at least for the next three to five years.
[Guest]: And given demonetisation, this entire process of negotiation may well break down and break
[Guest]: down for very rational reasons. One of the areas which the centre does not have any sort
[Guest]: of say in is stamp duty. That's imposed on land and it's collected by every state which
[Guest]: sets its own circle rates and things and for reasons which we all know, but let's not elaborate,
[Guest]: the real estate market has frozen. The secondary real estate market essentially does not exist
[Guest]: at this point of time and whenever it does come back, there is a fairly good chance that
[Guest]: it will be depressed in terms of value for a while. If that happens, the states will
[Guest]: lose stamp duty revenue. If they lose stamp duty revenue and they anticipate losses of
[Guest]: revenue at least for the first couple of years on GST, most of them do not want to be placed
[Guest]: in a position where they'll be running at fiscal deficits, which will actually erode
[Guest]: their bargaining power versus the centre. A state which has, in fact we've seen this,
[Guest]: a state which has reasonably sound finances, a Tamil Nadu or a Maharashtra, has regardless
[Guest]: of the government at the centre vis-a-vis the government at the state, it has a lot
[Guest]: of bargaining power because they can manage their own finances. Essentially Tamil Nadu
[Guest]: or Gujarat or Maharashtra could be independent countries, maybe not very prosperous independent
[Guest]: countries but they run reasonably balanced budgets, they earn their own revenue and in
[Guest]: that sense they do not need central intervention. A Bihar can't. A Bihar or a Jharkhand is much
[Guest]: more dependent on the centre. And if you have a scenario where quite rationally a lot of
[Guest]: states anticipate a crunch in terms of internal revenue collections, they would rather not
[Guest]: have the GST happening. So I think there will be a further sequence of negotiations where
[Guest]: it could break down. And of course a redefinition of powers as it happens. So if it is implemented
[Guest]: at all, it will be a very messy implementation. Otherwise if there's a breakdown in negotiations
[Guest]: as well, essentially as the bill stands right now, if it's not implemented by 30th September
[Guest]: 2017, they would need to run a new set of bills through Parliament. And again, it is
[Guest]: going to be touch and go because this is a constitutional bill, you are dealing with
[Guest]: centre state relationships, the Rajya Sabha has to vote on it separately. It's not a money
[Guest]: bill, even though it's all about money, it is not a money bill. You have to push it through
[Guest]: the Rajya Sabha where the state representatives have to agree to give up their power. And
[Guest]: whether you can make that happen a second time if this bill lapses is, well let's say
[Guest]: it's likely to be doubtful. Also likely to be doubtful whether any sane central administration
[Guest]: will want to impose GST going into a general election, because you have a huge problem
[Guest]: if you anticipate even one year of chaos. And at the end of it you don't know where
[Guest]: your finances will be and you don't know what sort of impact that will have on specific
[Guest]: areas. Why would you want to take the risk going into a general election?
[Amit Varma]: So let me try and sum up the sort of unseen effects that you have spoken about. Number
[Amit Varma]: one is because of the potentially seven different kinds of categories and because of the multiple
[Amit Varma]: numerous exemptions that exist, the process will actually become even messier than it
[Amit Varma]: is now perhaps. There will be a lot of discretion given to government officials, the rent seeking
[Amit Varma]: will continue, the friction at the state borders will continue. You will still know when you
[Amit Varma]: approach a state border by car, by the line of trucks that you see that this must be a
[Amit Varma]: state border. And the second unseen effect is really where the states fear losing their
[Amit Varma]: independence because they're already hurt by the loss of stamp duty due to demonetisation
[Amit Varma]: and if they can't maintain a balanced budget they lose a lot of the bargaining power they
[Amit Varma]: have vis-a-vis the centre and you almost reach an imperial sort of system where the states
[Amit Varma]: have less power. So my question to you is that given that within the political economy
[Amit Varma]: we are in with so many states and so many parties and so many different competing interests
[Amit Varma]: that this kind of messy process was almost inevitable. Was the GST a good idea in India
[Amit Varma]: in the first place and if so how would you have done it differently?
[Guest]: I think you'd have had to find a way to live with three rates and note that right now I'm
[Guest]: just talking about the G. They still haven't worked out what the S rate is going to be
[Guest]: and that is also going to because… Can you elaborate on that G and S?
[Guest]: Yeah of course. They've worked out goods rates, they've worked out a zero rate, four rates
[Guest]: of 5%, 12%, 18% and 28%. There will be another rate which will be imposed specifically on
[Guest]: bullion and precious stones. That has not yet been negotiated. There will be a cess
[Guest]: on top of the 28% items which are luxury items etc. which will be imposed in order to raise
[Guest]: money for the anticipated losses that states will face in terms of revenue for the first
[Guest]: two to five years. This cess is supposed to have a time bound thing that it will only
[Guest]: happen for two years or whatever but you know what happens in India. Reservations are supposed
[Guest]: to be time bound. So we don't know how that will happen and they haven't yet gotten down
[Guest]: to brass tacks working out the service tax rates. Now the service tax rates as you all
[Guest]: know is about 14.5%. However you have perfectly rational people saying that well you know
[Guest]: there is a difference between say an oncologist versus a civil engineer versus a pizza delivery
[Guest]: guy. They're all performing services undoubtedly but there is pretty much a difference. So
[Guest]: should that be reflected in a service tax rate? If you decide that it should be reflected
[Guest]: in a service tax rate, well again do you arguably, a flipkart which is based in Bangalore, if
[Guest]: it's acting as a delivery boy and delivering something to you in Delhi, it is a service
[Guest]: so it should have a service tax component but if you have a service tax component what
[Guest]: should that service tax component be? So this back and forth is going on. So they don't
[Guest]: even apart from the goods rates which are still subject to reclassifications, they haven't
[Guest]: yet worked out the service tax rates at all. So I think that is where you have a real problem
[Guest]: happening now in that you need to sit down and say look you cannot have you know seven
[Guest]: different rates or ten different rates just because the current system has seven different
[Guest]: or ten different rates or twenty different rates. GST works essentially because it simplifies
[Guest]: the system. You have to you know find a median rate, whatever that median rate is which is
[Guest]: reasonably satisfactory and crunch it and just let it happen. I mean shrug your shoulders
[Guest]: and say okay maybe service tax should be 16% and let it go for a year. If 16% turns out
[Amit Varma]: to be too high then cut it back. So just a further question to go back to the goods rates
[Amit Varma]: for example just a jeep out of it. You said there are four existing rates with three more
[Amit Varma]: potential rates in three different categories possibly coming up. Now why is this? Who asked
[Guest]: for these different rates because they tried to the essentially because our state excise
[Guest]: systems have on even our central tax systems have these extremely complicated classifications
[Guest]: and reclassifications of goods. So when they started negotiating for this instead of throwing
[Guest]: that out of the window and saying that let's have a simplified system they said no no no
[Guest]: you know we call cars luxury items so we have to have a rate which. But who said like who
[Guest]: is the interest group which is protesting this? Well every interest group obviously
[Guest]: is involved all the manufacturers associations and the traders associations have lobbied.
[Guest]: At the same time central and state government finance ministers of state finance ministers
[Guest]: have put their feet down and said that well you know we charge a lot we charge a high
[Guest]: amount on let's say electronic items or cars. So we want that to have that higher amount
[Guest]: should be charged in in the whatchamacallit in the GST so it should be at 28%. At the
[Guest]: same time you know you have it's a classification which is electronic items but not computers
[Guest]: and mobile phones. So you are running into subcategories of classification because computers
[Guest]: are I think charged at the lowest rate or at zero I'm not quite sure but it's an extremely
[Guest]: low rate whereas I say a microwave oven could be having a 35% or 40% tax on it given the
[Guest]: combination of central and state excisors. Now essentially a microwave is a dumb computer
[Guest]: it has a chip in it and you know the rest of it is it's just faff. But you have at some
[Guest]: stage decided to make these peculiar distinctions and you continue making these peculiar distinctions
[Guest]: even though you had a chance and you could have actually said that let's converge to
[Guest]: some average rate which seems reasonable let's cut it down to three different items you know
[Guest]: sinful items non-sinful items and essential items. Essential items for example food has
[Guest]: zero tax, books are zero tax, physical books are. Now charging you for downloading Kindle
[Guest]: books this will bankrupt me. Yeah so I mean on the at least a contemplating charging you
[Guest]: for downloading Kindle books and again books are free but music cassettes are not, a computer
[Guest]: program is not. Well again certain categories of computer programs are free but games are
[Guest]: not. So I mean our zero tax versus games not being zero tax so if you have some man sitting
[Guest]: there somewhere in a you know Sarkari office making these distinctions for what might or
[Amit Varma]: might not seem rational reasons. So one final question now given that we can't just create
[Amit Varma]: a utopian world where we design everything absolutely perfectly and we have to work within
[Amit Varma]: the limitations of the system. Supposing Narendra Modi was to walk in the door and say Devanshu
[Amit Varma]: I've made many mistakes but I've finally met you so I'm going to take you to this time
[Amit Varma]: machine and you're going to come back in time with me to 2014 and you are going to run my
[Amit Varma]: GST policy. Should we have a GST? Should we let taxes stay there? If we try to get a GST
[Amit Varma]: through how should we design it? What are the kind of compromises we can make and we
[Amit Varma]: cannot make? What would you then do as a policy maker? What would you do differently? I would
[Guest]: have pared it down to three rates. I would have told the states that we'll calculate
[Guest]: a shadow rate based on the income you would have made on every item of the old thing and
[Guest]: we'll figure out a way of compensating you. Instead of looking for a constitutional amendment
[Guest]: I would have made it some sort of tripartite deal with maybe the RBI or maybe even the
[Guest]: World Bank standing in as a interlocutor and guarantor for this particular financial transaction
[Guest]: that shadow tolling happens for example on roads where you say that well we won't make
[Guest]: this a toll road because it's public policy we want to connect point A to point B and
[Guest]: we're not going to toll it. However the guy that builds it will count every vehicle that
[Guest]: wanders down the road and we'll figure out at the end of the year or every quarter or
[Guest]: whatever it is every two weeks as the case may be how much revenue there would have been
[Guest]: and we'll pay that revenue. So shadow tolling I would have tried you're asking me this question
[Guest]: out of the blue but I would have tried doing something like that figuring out a shadow
[Guest]: tolling a shadow tax system where if it's stuck with the old system this is what the
[Guest]: and you have to anyway it may sound complicated but anyway this is a comparison you have to
[Guest]: make to find out to find out whether GST makes sense or not. So I would have said that we'll
[Guest]: do that and you know we'll compensate you if it turns out that you're making you know
[Guest]: that you are foregoing revenues under GST and if it turns out that you're not foregoing
[Guest]: revenues and you're actually ending up better off or we are ending up better off at the
[Guest]: end of it well then the centre keeps the money. If you like this is a two-way bet if the GST
[Guest]: works the centre actually ends up with a surplus and the states end up with the same money
[Guest]: that they would have made anyway. And if the GST doesn't work the states get the money
[Guest]: they would have made anyway but the centre loses a little bit. The centre loses something.
[Amit Varma]: They take the onus of GST on themselves which would make the state more agreeable. The risk
[Guest]: would be the centres and you'd ask them to dismantle essentially dismantle your state
[Guest]: excise services or cut it down to one chap who doesn't necessarily stop trucks. You're
[Guest]: going digital anyway so you know this guy as the truck approaches you he can basically
[Guest]: SMS you his manifest and you enter it and you carry on. Thanks a lot Devansh, a pleasure
[Amit Varma]: talking to you. The GST is deeply complicated. It may or may not actually pass this year
[Amit Varma]: but even if it does it's useful to remember that it's had such a convoluted development
[Amit Varma]: that it may not achieve much of what its designers would like. It is always good to be forewarned.
[Amit Varma]: On that note I shall sign off from the show. See you next week.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Seen and The Unseen, Amit Verma will be talking to Shikha Dalmia about
[Unknown]: immigration. For more, check out seenunseen.in. If you enjoyed listening to The Seen and The
[Amit Varma]: Unseen, check out another great show by IVM Podcasts, Made in India, hosted by my friend
[Amit Varma]: May Thomas, where every week she profiles up-and-coming independent Indian bands.
[Unknown]: Hey man, just help me out man. I need some, I need some podcasts man. I haven't had a
[Unknown]: fix in a week. Just need some. Don't you worry about it. I got podcasts galore for you man.
[Unknown]: Just go to ivmpodcasts.com. You can also find us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Thanks
[Amit Varma]: man. I'm gonna check it out.